Greeting in Nuu-chah-nulth  language
Chuu, my name is J'net Ayaqwayaksheelth, one who gives away and still stands tall,
an Ahousaht woman from the Nuu-chah-nulth Nation. I'm a daughter of Stella August,
granddaughter of Ida Swan, August Shish and I have three beautiful children, Ocean, Thee and Taliesen.
Thank you for this opportunity to be a part of sharing a testimony.
I'm the new-newly appointed Director of Indigenous Relations at Community Engagement at the National Film Board of Canada.
And in this role, since September 2022, it's fairly new role, and one of the reasons I wanted to come on board is
I've been a civil servant since 2014, working at the Provincial level now at the Federal level.
I wanted to explore very briefly how I keep my West Coast traditions alive
while living in transplanted more than 3500 kilometers away from my homeland.
And one of the ways that I'm able to accomplish that is because I myself personally am a textile artist, a cedar bark weaver.
I do beadwork lots of amazing ways to keep my traditions going.
So one of my ways I wear my art is by putting on my clothes in this particular jacket is from one of my mentors
that I look up to from the West Coast, from the Tseshaht Nation in Port of Alberni, Joyce Mahima Little,
so when I want to look my best I will wear something Joyce made.
And the other way that I'll dress my best is I will wear some of my West Coast jewelry.
So here's a beautiful Nuu-chah-nulth pendant with our West Coast logo.
We all call it the graduation pendant that I got when I graduated from high school.
So when I want to represent my community, my nation, I wear that as well.
And even on my earrings that are black and red, which is a very iconic West Coast colors, we're not all Heida, by the way.
I am Nuu-chah-nulth.
We're not one good looking group of people, but what I've got here is a colleagues when I was leaving the provincial museum here
to move onto the National Film Board of Canada, she gave me
these black and red earrings so even other West Coasters know, like our red and black.
I'm a cedar bark weaver, here's how we wear our cedar bark hair, headband.
My children moderned it up, my youngest wears his backwards.
To him, it's more comfortable, it's less itchy he says because the cedar bark often bothers him in the head.
And here's my cedar bark hat that I made that with the help of Geraldine, Edgar, Tom.
So again, there's lots of ways that I represent my, my culture and cultural wise,
I also will bring my, my drum, my West Coast Wild Woman Drum to show that my West Coast ways are represented.
I do have some tobacco ties and I'm made aware of tobacco ties here or when I'm invited to be part of events
and people want to offer me a customary gift, I remind them it is a West Coaster
I would prefer a blanket, so I have a lovely collection of blankets.
They don't have to be fancy blankets.
I do have my my rattle.
I don't know if you can hear it, but it doesn't have to be really loud because the ancestors will hear your ceremony.
And we often will put our baby's teeth inside our rattles because it remind us
who were who were singing for our little ones, our children.
So there's lots of ways as well through ritual, we have water that I do water ceremony in, in the work that I do,
where I'll have water and words that we speak in a meeting will be shared with a living plant at the end,
so our intentions continue to grow and I will often bring candlelight,
which is often a common culture ritual that we can share across cultures.
But it's also remembering that as an Indigenous educator, Nuu-chah-nulth educator,
I and as an artist, I often remind people that I work with
that we don't worship nature as Indigenous people, we learn from nature.
So I'll be very mindful of what I wear to meetings if I want to invoke kindness I'll wear hummingbird.
If I want to invoke eagle and have objectivity and see a bigger picture, I'll wear something with eagle on it or eagle feather.
If I want to be sure to explore a potential and transformation, I'll wear something with butterfly and,
you know, bear if I want to be introspective and thoughtful and mindful.
So lots of different ways that we can invoke spirit.
And I will, like I said in another conversation that I live a block away from the Lake Ontario,
and I am familiar with the traditions this way, but as a West Coaster living out here,
I find it really valuable to keep my West Coast traditions alive and represent my ancestors,
even with my little bit of an opening and my candlelight and my water ceremony as a way to show respect for where I came from
and keep those traditions alive wherever I live and my children are watching so they also learn how to keep those traditions alive.
So thanks for thanks for listening.
I hope that was helpful. Chuu